# DebSecCan MCP Server

This MCP server is inspired from debsecan utility on Debian to give list of
vulnerable packages installed on the system. The server will expose following
tools:

## Tools

### 1. list-vulnerablities

It will use the installed package list generated by initialized module and
vulnerability data which is prepared in initialize module to get a list of CVE
on the system. It will then call `categorise_vulnerabilities` to categorise the
vulnerabilities in critical, high, medium, low and negligible based on the EPSS
score and severity of the vulnerability. It will then return the list of
vulnerabilities. Make sure that function only returns CVE ID for each category
with no other details.

### 2. research-cves

This tool will take a list of CVEs and return the list of Vulnerability object
with required details. It will internally use vulnerability objects prepared by
initialization code.

## Architecture

The server will contain some resuable components which will be the main brain of
the MCP server and the tools will be calling these when they are invoked.

### Initialization

Before MCP server starts it should initialize few things globally which can be
used by tools function without needing to call things repeatedly.

1. It will call `epss.download_epss()` to download the EPSS data and prepare a
   map of the CVEs along with their scores.
2. It will call `package.get_installed_packages()` to get the list of packages
   installed on the system.
3. It will call `vulnerability.fetch_data()` to download the CVE data from the
   security tracker of Debian and prepare a map of the CVEs along with their
   details.

All this data will be then available for the tool functions to re-use.

### EPSS

This module will be responsible for fetching the EPSS score from the EPSS API
and preparing a map of the CVEs along with their scores. It will be used to
enrich `Vulnerability` object with EPSS score.

Check this code for function for downloading epss and loading epss cve maps [5]

### Package

This module essentially deals with packages on the system. It will have a class
`PackageFile` similar to `debsecan.PackageFile` [2] which will be used to read
the package files and prepare the data for `Vulnerability` class. It will also
have a class `Version` similar to `debsecan.Version` [3] which will be used to
compare versions of packages.

#### 1. PackageFile

Models on the `debsecan.PackageFile` class [2]. This class will be used to read
the package files and prepare the data for `Vulnerability` class.

#### 2. Version

Models on the `debsecan.Version` class [3]. This class will be used to compare
versions of packages.

It will have following functions

#### 1. get_installed_packages

This function will be used to get the list of installed packages on the system.
It will read /var/lib/dpkg/status or access the package information via
subprocess module to return list of packages installed on the system. It will
return a list of `PackageFile` objects.


### Vulnerability

This module mostly deals with fetching the CVE data from the security tracker of
Debian parsing and preparing a map of the CVEs along with their details. This
module will be used by both tools.

It will have classes based on original debsecan code


#### 1. Vulnerability

A class describing vulnerability packages etc to be modelled on
`debsecan.Vulnerability` class [1]. The vulnerability object is such that when
converting to string it should give minimum yet comprehensive details of the
vulnerability. Idea is to reduce token for LLM when using this object.

#### 1. fetch_data

Will be closely modeled on what the debsecan is doing in its function
`debsecan.fetch_data` and return values are similar to original function [4].
The code is just modeled on this and need not be the same as the original code.

#### 2. cve_detail

Given a CVE it will return a vulnerability object consturcted in `fetch_data` by
enriching the data with EPSS score from `epss` module.

#### 3. categorise_vulnerabilities

Takes list of CVE and then uses the `Vulnerability` object from `vulnerability`
module to categroise the vulnerabilities in

[1] https://gitlab.com/fweimer/debsecan/-/blob/master/src/debsecan?ref_type=heads#L416
[2] https://gitlab.com/fweimer/debsecan/-/blob/master/src/debsecan?ref_type=heads#L115
[3] https://gitlab.com/fweimer/debsecan/-/blob/master/src/debsecan?ref_type=heads#L80
[4] https://gitlab.com/fweimer/debsecan/-/blob/master/src/debsecan?ref_type=heads#L495
[5] https://github.com/copyninja/notebooks/blob/main/langchain/secscan-common.ipynb
